This is the linear relationship between joint
angle velocity and end effector velocity that
we worked out a moment ago. The Jacobian matrix
here J is a two by two matrix and that means
that it's very easy to invert, so we can write
the expression like this. And what this is
saying is if I know the end effector velocity
that I want, and if I can compute the Jacobian
matrix and then invert it, I can work out
what joint angle velocities I need in order
to achieve this particular end effector velocity
and this is a very powerful thing. No matter
what the end effector velocity is, I can always
work out a set of joint angle velocities that
will give me that end effector velocity.
We've previously worked out what the Jacobian
matrix is for this simple, two link, planar
manipulator and because it's only a two by
two matrix, it's very easy to invert and the
inverse looks like this. There's one slightly
problematic aspect of this inverse Jacobian
and that is this term here, when the second
joint angle, Q2 is equal to zero, this inverse
Jacobian becomes infinite. That might seem
a little bit unusual but there's a pretty
simple intuition behind this.
Let's have a look at the robot configuration
where this occurs. So this is what the robot
looks like when Q2 is equal to zero. And this
particular configuration of the robot is often
referred to as a singular pose because it
introduces a singularity into the Jacobian
matrix of the robot. A robot configuration
like this is really exactly the same as a
single link robot that looks like this, so
this is a robot which only a single joint
angle. And clearly a robot like this has got
very, very limited motion. The end effector
velocity can only ever be parallel to this
blue vector here. That is tangential to the
axis of the robot's link. It's not possible
for the robot end effector to move in this
direction at all and this is where the term
singularity comes from. In this particular
configuration of the robot, it's lost a degree
of freedom. There is a direction in the robot's
Cartesian workspace, in which it is impossible
for the end effector to move.
Even if a joint angle in not exactly equal
to zero; perhaps it's nearly zero, then we
will still have problems in the directions
that the robot is able to move. So a robot
in this sort of configuration will find it
difficult to move in this particular direction.
We can compute the determinant of the Jacobian
matrix and if it's equal to zero or if it's
equal to small, that tells you that there
is some motion direction for the robot that
will be difficult or awkward. You can think
about this in terms of your own arm; there
are some configurations of the arm where you
have the ability to move with almost equal
velocity in many different directions and
there are some other configurations of your
arm, where it's really only possible to have
velocity in one direction; for instance when
you're trying to throw a ball, you put your
arm into a configuration where you can have
maximum velocity in the direction you want
the ball to go, but almost no velocity component
in direction orthogonal to that.
Another way to describe this situation is
in terms of the condition number of the Jacobian.
The condition number is a scalar that we can
compute from any matrix and if the condition
number is large it indicates that the matrix
is close to being singular, that is it's determine
is close to zero. You can consider this problematic
situation of the Jacobian matrix in terms
of it having either a small determinant or
a large condition number. The condition number
can be computed in MATLAB using the built
in function "cond()".